Internationalization and Localization
=====================================

This guild will help you to understand internationalization and localisation
support provided by Rapido framework.

Overview
--------

Rapido has full support for internationalization of text in code and templates,
and format localization of dates and numbers. The terms internationalization
and localization are generally abbreviated as `i18n` and `L10n` respectively.
Internationalization and localization is a process of adapting a computer
software to different languages and regional differences. For more information
on the topic, see `Wikipedia`_.

The general workflow of the process is like this:

* Application authors have to specify which part of their application
  should be translatable.
* Application authors or integrators should provide translation catalogs
  for different locale.
* Rapido will translate web applications for users according to their
  language preferences.

Rapido provides internationalization and localization support using `Babel`_ and
`pytz`_.

.. _Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internationalization_and_localization
.. _Babel: http://babel.edgewall.org/
.. _pytz: http://pytz.sourceforge.net/

Internationalization
--------------------

The general goal of internationalization is to allow a single web application
to offer it's contents in multiple languages.

Rapido provides a way to specify which part of the application should be
translated. The developers have to mark translatable strings using several
`gettext` functions; and only those strings will be translated.

Standard Translations
+++++++++++++++++++++

You can specify a translation with function ``rapido.i18n.gettext`` which is
aliased to ``_()`` for convention. The alias ``_()`` is installed as a
``__builtins__`` so that you can directly use ``_()`` in your code without
importing them.

Here is an example of translating a python module::

    from rapido import web
    from rapido.web import request

    @web.route('/')
    def index():
        return _('Hello World!')

    @web.route('/hello/<msg>')
    def hello(msg):
        return _('Hello %(msg)s', msg=msg)

And here is an example of translating `Jinja2` template:

.. sourcecode:: html+jinja

    <title>{{ gettext('Hello World!') }}</title>
    <title>{{ gettext(title) }}</title>
    <title>{{ _('Hello World!') }}</title>

For more information, see `Jinja2 documentation`_.

.. _Jinja2 documentation: http://jinja.pocoo.org/2/documentation/extensions#newstyle-gettext

Pluralization
+++++++++++++

You can specify pluralized messages with function ``rapido.i18n.ngettext``.

This function does a plural-forms lookup of a given string depending on the `num`
parameter and uses `plural` instead of `string` if `num` represents plural in
the current locale.

For example::

    from rapido.i18n import ngettext

    from foo.models import Apple

    @web.route('/')
    def index():
        apples = Apple.all().fetch(-1)
        return ngettext('%(num)d Apple', '%(num)d Apples!', num=len(apples))

In this example, if number of apples represents plural in current locale, the
second string will be return. For example, if ``num`` is `2` it returns ``'2 Apples!'``
but if ``num`` is either `0` or `1`, it returns ``'1 Apple'``.

Translating JavaScript
++++++++++++++++++++++

todo

Using translations with JavaScript
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

todo

Localization
------------

Localization of an application is a process of adapting regional deferences.
This can be achieved by creating region specific language files and formatting
numbers and dates accordingly.

Working with Catalogs
+++++++++++++++++++++

Once the strings in the application are marked to be translatable, next step
is to create message catalogs for a particular language. A message catalog is
a plain text file with extension `.po`, representing a single language, containing
all the translatable strings and how they should be represented in particular
language.

Rapido uses `Babel`_ command line interface to generate message files. The files
when translated should be compiled in `.mo` format in order to use the new translations.

This can be done with the `admin.py` script generated in your project directory.
Type following command on your terminal to see help on catalog related commands.

::

    $ ./admin help babel
    admin.py babel <action> [options] [package [package [...]]]

    Perform i18n message catalog actions.

    options:

      -l --locale  locale (e.g. en_US, fr_FR)
      -d --domain  message catalog domain
      -v --verbose enable verbose output
      -h --help    display help and exit

    available actions:

      compile  compile message catalogs to MO files
      extract  extract messages from source files and generate a POT file
      init     create new message catalogs from generated POT file
      update   update existing message catalogs from generated POT file

This actions provided by `admin.py babel` command is identical to the `pybabel`
script that comes with `Babel`_.

Extracting messages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step is to extract translatable strings into a message catalog template
file. This can be done with `admin.py babel extract` command::

    $ ./admin.py babel extract

This command will generate catalog templates for all the available packages in
current project. If you want to extract strings for only a particular package, do
this::

    $ ./admin.py babel extract foo bar

Where, `foo` and `bar` are packages of current project. A `locale/messages.pot`
file will be created under every specified packages.

Creating message catalogs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The next step is to create message catalogs for a new file. If you already have
created message catalog for the language, head over to next section on how to
update existing catalogs. Creating new catalogs is as easy as::

    $ ./admin.py babel init -l fr_FR foo

Where, `foo` is a package of current project, if omitted, catalogs will be created
for all the available packages.

A catalog file `locale/fr_FR/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po` will be created under all
the specified packages.

.. note::

    Catalogs will be only created if it doesn't exit.

Updating message catalogs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If message catalog is already created and you have changed your code and think
that the translatable strings have been changed, you should consider updating
existing catalogs. This can be done like this::

    $ ./admin.py babel update -l fr_FR foo

If you omit package name, it will perform update on all the available packages.
Even if you omit the locale option it will perform update for all the existing
languages for a package.

Compiling message catalogs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you have created/updated message catalog for a particular language. You have
to translate the catalogs and then compile it to `.mo` format so that the translations
can be used by the system. This can be done like this::

    $ ./admin.py babel compile -l fr_FR foo

If you omit package name, it will compile catalogs of the given language for all
the available packages. Even if you omit the locale option it will compile all
the available catalogs.

Catalogs for JavaScript
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Message catalogs for JavaScript falls under `javascript` domain. Perform all the
above actions with option `-d javascript` to create message catalogs for javascript.

Formatting
++++++++++

Rapido provides several functions to format numbers, decimals and date values to
locale specific formats. It also provides few functions to parse localized numbers,
decimals and date values.

See API documentation for more information.

